# QA

_"Quality . . . you know what it is, yet you don’t know what it is. But that’s self-contradictory. But some things are better than others; that is, they have more quality. But when you try to say what the quality is, apart from the things that have it, it all goes poof! There’s nothing to talk about . . . Obviously some things are better than others . . . but what’s the betterness? . . . So round and round you go, spinning mental wheels and nowhere finding anyplace to get traction. What the hell is Quality? What is it?"_

In the most general sense, software quality can be defined as: An effective software process applied in a manner that creates a useful product that provides measurable value for those who produce it and those who use it.

* An effective software process establishes the infrastructure that supports any effort at building a high-quality software product. The management aspects of process create the checks and balances that help avoid project chaos—a key contributor to poor quality. Software engineering practices allow the developer to analyze the problem and design a solid solution—both critical to building high-quality software. Finally, umbrella activities such as change management and technical reviews have as much to do with quality as any other part of software engineering practice.
* A useful product delivers the content, functions, and features that the end user desires, but as important, it delivers these assets in a reliable, error-free way. A useful product always satisfies those requirements that have been explicitly stated by stakeholders. In addition, it satisfies a set of implicit requirements (e.g., ease of use) that are expected of all high-quality software.
* By adding value for both the producer and user of a software product, high quality
software provides benefits for the software organization and the end user community. The software organization gains added value because high-quality software requires less maintenance effort, fewer bug fixes, and reduced customer support. This enables software engineers to spend more time creating new applications and less on rework. The user community gains added value because the application provides a useful capability in a way that expedites some business process. The end result is (1) greater software product revenue, (2) better profitability when an application supports a business process, and/or (3) improved availability of information that is crucial for the business.

## Elements of QA

* Standards. The IEEE, ISO, and other standards organizations have produced a broad array of software engineering standards and related documents. Standards may be adopted voluntarily by a software engineering organization or imposed by the customer or other stakeholders. The job of QA is to ensure that standards that have been adopted are followed and that all work products conform to them.
* Reviews and audits. Technical reviews are a quality control activity performed by software engineers for software engineers. Their intent is to uncover errors. Audits are a type of review performed by QA personnel with the intent of ensuring that quality guidelines are being followed for software engineering work. For example, an audit of the review process might be conducted to ensure that reviews are being performed in a manner that will lead to the highest likelihood of uncovering errors.
* Testing. Software testing is a quality control function that has one primary goal—to find errors. The job of QA is to ensure that testing is properly planned and efficiently conducted so that it has the highest likelihood of achieving its primary goal.
* Error/defect collection and analysis. The only way to improve is to measure how you’re doing. QA collects and analyzes error and defect data to better understand how errors are introduced and what software engineering activities are best suited to eliminating them.
* Change management. Change is one of the most disruptive aspects of any software project. If it is not properly managed, change can lead to confusion, and confusion almost always leads to poor quality. SQA ensures that adequate change management practices have been instituted.
* Education. Every software organization wants to improve its software engineering practices. A key contributor to improvement is education of software engineers, their managers, and other stakeholders. The SQA organization takes the lead in software process improvement and is a key proponent and sponsor of educational programs.
* Vendor management. Three categories of software are acquired from external software vendors—shrink-wrapped packages (e.g., Microsoft Office), a tailored shell that provides a basic skeletal structure that is custom tailored to the needs of a purchaser, and contracted software that is custom designed and constructed from specifications provided by the customer organization. The job of the QA organization is to ensure that high-quality software results by suggesting specific quality practices that the vendor should follow (when possible) and incorporating quality mandates as part of any contract with an external vendor.
* Security management. With the increase in cyber crime and new government regulations regarding privacy, every software organization should institute policies that protect data at all levels, establish firewall protection for mobile apps, and ensure that software has not been tampered with internally. QA ensures that appropriate process and technology are used to achieve software security.
* Safety. Because software is almost always a pivotal component of humanrated systems (e.g., automotive or aircraft applications), the impact of hidden defects can be catastrophic. QA may be responsible for assessing the impact of software failure and for initiating those steps required to reduce risk.
* Risk management. Although the analysis and mitigation of risk (Chapter 26) is the concern of software engineers, the QA organization ensures that risk management activities are properly conducted and that risk-related contingency plans have been established.

## Tasks

* Prepares an QA plan for a project. The plan is developed as part of project planning and is reviewed by all stakeholders. Quality assurance activities performed by the software engineering team and the QA group are governed by the plan. The plan identifies evaluations to be performed, audits and reviews to be conducted, standards that are applicable to the project, procedures for error reporting and tracking, work products that are produced by the QA group, and feedback that will be provided to the software team.
* Participates in the development of the project’s software process description. The software team selects a process for the work to be performed. The QA group reviews the process description for compliance with organizational policy, internal software standards, externally imposed standards (e.g., ISO-9001), and other parts of the software project plan.
* Reviews software engineering activities to verify compliance with the defined software process. The QA group identifies, documents, and tracks deviations from the process and verifies that corrections have been made.
* Audits designated software work products to verify compliance with those defined as part of the software process. The QA group reviews selected work products; identifies, documents, and tracks deviations; verifies that corrections have been made; and periodically reports the results of its work to the project manager.
* Ensures that deviations in software work and work products are documented and handled according to a documented procedure. Deviations may be encountered in the project plan, process description, applicable standards, or software engineering work products.
* Records any noncompliance, and reports to senior management. Noncompliance items are tracked until they are resolved.

## Activities

* Requirements quality. The correctness, completeness, and consistency of the requirements model will have a strong influence on the quality of all work products that follow. QA must ensure that the software team has properly reviewed the requirements model to achieve a high level of quality.
* Design quality. Every element of the design model should be assessed by the software team to ensure that it exhibits high quality and that the design itself conforms to requirements. QA looks for attributes of the design that are indicators of quality.
* Code quality. Source code and related work products (e.g., other descriptive information) must conform to local coding standards and exhibit characteristics that will facilitate maintainability. QA should isolate those attributes that allow a reasonable analysis of the quality of code.
* Quality control effectiveness. A software team should apply limited resources in a way that has the highest likelihood of achieving a high-quality result. QA analyzes the allocation of resources for reviews and testing to assess whether they are being allocated in the most effective manner.

## References

[Software Engineering a Practitioner's Approach 9th Edition](https://www.amazon.com/-/es/Roger-Pressman-dp-1259872971/dp/1259872971)
